docs: Add a guide for deploying Redpanda in AKS (#1125)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/deploy/deployment-option/self-hosted/kubernetes/gke-guide.mdx

</head>

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Versions from '../../../../shared/_versions.mdx'
import InstallRpkHomebrew from "../../../../get-started/shared/_install-rpk-homebrew.mdx"
import InstallRpkLinux from "../../../../get-started/shared/_install-rpk-linux.mdx"

Deploy a Redpanda cluster and Redpanda Console in Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) using the Helm chart. Then, use rpk both as an internal client and an external client to interact with your Redpanda cluster from the command line.

<details>
<summary>
Looking for the Redpanda Operator?
</summary>

If you're an existing user of the Redpanda Operator, see the [Redpanda Operator documentation](../../../../../reference/redpanda-operator). 

:::warning
Redpanda does not recommend the Redpanda Operator for new deployments. The Redpanda Operator was built for Redpanda Cloud and has unique features and workflows for that specific use case. If you're not already using the Redpanda Operator, continue with this tutorial to get started with the Redpanda Helm chart.
:::

</details>

## Prerequisites

> Before you begin, make sure that you have the correct software for your Kubernetes platform:

Author: ```suggestion
Before you begin, you must have the correct software for your Kubernetes platform:
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Complete the 'Before you begin' steps and the 'Launch Cloud Shell' steps of the [GKE quickstart](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/deploy-app-cluster#before-you-begin). Cloud Shell comes preinstalled with the Google Cloud CLI, the `kubectl` command-line tool, and the Helm package manager.

## Create a GKE cluster

Replace the `<region>` placeholder with your own region.

```bash
gcloud container clusters create redpanda \
  --machine-type n1-standard-4 \
  --num-nodes=3 \
  --region=<region>
```

## Deploy Redpanda

1. Install Redpanda using Helm:

  ```bash
  helm repo add redpanda https://charts.redpanda.com/
  helm repo update
  helm install redpanda redpanda/redpanda \
    --namespace redpanda \
    --create-namespace
  ```

  The installation displays some tips for getting started.

1. Wait for the Redpanda cluster to be ready:

  ```bash
  kubectl -n redpanda rollout status statefulset redpanda --watch
  ```

  When the Redpanda cluster is ready, the output should look similar to the following:

  ```text
  statefulset rolling update complete 3 pods at revision redpanda-8654f645b4...
  ```

>   If your cluster remains in a pending state, see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

Author: ```suggestion
  If your cluster remains in a pending state, see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting).
```

    <InstallRpkHomebrew/>

  </TabItem>
  </Tabs>

1. Set the `REDPANDA_BROKERS` environment variable to the external IP addresses of your Kubernetes nodes:

  ```bash
  export REDPANDA_BROKERS=203.0.113.3:31092,203.0.113.5:31092,203.0.113.7:31092
  ```

  :::note
  31092 is the Kafka API port that's exposed by the NodePort Service.
  :::

1. Get the cluster info:

  ```bash
  rpk cluster info
  ```

  <details>
  <summary>
  Example output
  </summary>

  ```text
  CLUSTER
  =======
  redpanda.ad4a2f55-f34e-4a7f-babd-01d392cf4e80

  BROKERS
  =======
  ID    HOST           PORT
  0     203.0.113.3    31092
  1*    203.0.113.5    31092
  2     203.0.113.7    31092
  ```

  </details>

## Troubleshooting

### StatefulSet never rolls out

If the StatefulSet Pods remain in a pending state, they may be waiting for resources to become available:

* Make sure that you have a default StorageClass available in your Kubernetes cluster and that the underlying volumes have at least 20Gi of storage capacity.

  ```bash
  kubectl get storageclass
  ```

### dig not defined

`Error: parse error at (redpanda/templates/statefulset.yaml:203): function "dig" not defined`

> If you see this error, make sure that you are using the correct version of Helm. See the [prerequisites](#prerequisites).

Author: ```suggestion
If you see this error, make sure that you are using the correct version of Helm. See the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites).
```
